Pacific.
And we've had a number of questions, uh,
for MFA over the course of the last few months on this,
of the back of hearing from a group thought,
the Pacific Exporters Network earlier in the year.
And we were interested in how the aid was flown to Pacific,
how we're tracking that in terms of, um,
the Zealand business involvement in that in particular.
And uh, your name came up as, uh, someone with a high level
of, uh, knowledge and expertise in this area.
And so we wanted to extend an invitation to you, Dr. Wood,
to come join us, to give us some insight around the flow
of aid from your perspective to help our understanding.
Um, we have 15 minutes sit down for today.
Hopefully that's all right for you.
I'm sure there'll be questions from people as well.
Uh, but we're really interested in, I guess, uh, a bit
of a summary of the volume of aid, where it's going,
who's doing it, and a tight untied aspects.
Um, and then we can delve into questions from there.
So over to you. You do.
Alright, thank you. Morning. Morning. True.
And uh, good day. Good day. Uh, my name is Terrence Wood.
I work for Australia National University,
but I'm a New Zealander
and I live here in New Zealand for about half of the year.
When I'm not in New Zealand, I split my time
between Canberra and Port Moresby.
Um, I'm an academic,
obviously my research focuses on foreign aid in the Pacific
and also on the political economy
of Western Pacific countries.
Um, so I'm gonna speak to you, uh,
in my academic capacity today,
but also unfortunately at one point this talk,
I'm gonna lapse into my alternate persona,
which is disgruntled taxpayer of Kilburn.
Um, so only
For half the Year though.
Yes. Yeah, yeah. The other half
of the year I'm quite happy a gentleman actually.
Um, so we might be able
to skip forward a few slides in the name of expediency.
The most important thing I want to tell you though is
although New Zealand is a small donor globally, we focus a,
a large amount of our aid on Pacific
and compared to other regions globally, uh,
the Pacific is the one part of the world where, uh,
Pacific countries, uh,
the aid in flows are very large compared to the size
of most Pacific countries economies or in other, uh, words.
Um, New Zealand is one of the largest donors in the Pacific
and the Pacific is one of the, uh, regions globally
where aid really matters a lot.
So if we deliver our aid well in the Pacific,
we can do a lot to help the countries of the Pacific,
but if we get it wrong, uh, well uh,
best case scenario will be squandering.
Our aid worst case scenario will actually be harming the
countries who we are claim to be friends with in the region.
Um, and on that subject, on the subject
of getting things wrong, I'm now going to explain
to you why tying aid would be a bad thing.
Um, do you all understand, uh, what I say when I'm, uh,
using the term tying aid?
Yeah, right. So I see you received the submission from the
Pacific Exporters Network
and uh, the speaker was uh, suggesting that 30%
of New Zealand aid should be, uh, tied to private sector
companies that work in the Pacific.
Um, and there are a number of reasons why tying our aid
to the Pacific would be a bad idea.
Um, and if we skip forward Zach to reason one, um,
the first thing, and this is really important to understand,
there are three different, uh, things
that you can focus your aid on.
You can focus your aid on helping poor people living in
uh, poorer countries.
You can focus your aid on advancing your geostrategic
interests and you can foc
or you could focus your aid on helping subsidize your own
private sector companies.
And giving AID'S complex, it's really not that easy.
So it turns out that typically you can only focus your aid
on one of these three things.
At least if you want your aid to achieve one
of these objectives, it's very hard to do that object, uh,
meet that objective successfully if you try
and do more than one thing at once.
It's really a question of finding the right horse
for the right course when you give your foreign aid.
Um, and so give you a tangible example.
Um, there are some things where you would really want an NGO
to deliver, uh, the aid that we were giving.
So if we were trying to tackle uh, something such as malaria
and Papua New Guinea, you'd want a non-governmental
organization that was uh, well versed in how
to address issues associated with malaria.
You wouldn't want a private sector company from New Zealand.
They wouldn't do the job well obviously.
And on top of that, if you compelled in fact to give
that contract to a private sector company,
you probably wouldn't receive good value for money.
So it's hard to give aid effectively.
And my advice to you is that when you're trying to decide
what you wanna do with your aid,
you should really focus on delivering aid
through the right horse for the right course, uh, where
to do it, uh, to making your choices.
Um, and speaking about trying
to get the right horse for the right course.
Reason two, well if you ask New Zealanders
what they would like their aid focused on, um,
which we've done once in a public opinion survey,
you'll find that the vast majority of New Zealanders say
that they don't want their aid focused on advancing New
Zealand's geostrategic interests
or assisting New Zealand's businesses.
Uh, they want their aid focused on helping poor people in
poorer countries and that would seem quite significant
'cause these are the taxpayers
who fund our government aid program.
So that's another reason why's Ty aid would
be a bad thing to do.
The third reason, and I saw this was in MFAs written
response to some of your questions
and is that tying aid violates international, uh, norms
and it violates international agreements
that we've been party to as a country.
Um, and that's the sort of thing that if we were
to tie a large share of our aid, 30%
of our aid was a suggestion that I think was
provided by the Pacific Exporters network.
That's the sort of thing that would make us
look bad internationally.
Now if you're a large country such as the United States
or China, it's pretty easy to get away
with looking bad internationally.
But if you're a smaller country like New Zealand, you tend
to live or die by your international reputation.
And certainly when it comes to our aid in the Pacific,
well there's one country in particular
who our international reputation matters a lot too.
And that is of course Australia.
Australia's by far and away the largest
aid donor in the Pacific.
They're also our most important strategic partner
and they tie next to none
of the aid they give to the Pacific.
Um, and if they were to notice that all
of a sudden we were tying a large share, say 30% of the aid
that we were to give to the region, they wouldn't be happy.
They view us as an important partner.
And if we were to tie a large share of our aid to a region
where they would give most of their aid in an untied manner,
they would start to think of us as a free rider, someone
who is shirking our obligations, uh,
to either advance our shared geo strategic interests in the
region or to help promote development
objectives in the region.
So it would make us look bad in the eyes of a country
that matters a lot to us.
The next reason why we w wouldn't want to tie our aid
or why it be a bad idea to tie our aid
to specifically mandate that a large share
of our Agent Pacific was given via private sector
organizations in New Zealand is
that private sector organizations in New Zealand are already
very effective at winning contracts
for New Zealand's foreign aid to the Pacific
that is delivered by uh, private sector organizations.
So currently about 10% of New Zealand
New Zealand's aid Pacific goes through the private sector.
That's actually a larger share of our aid, uh, uh,
than we uh, uh, root through NGOs.
So about 10% of our aid Pacific goes
through the private sector
and of that age, New Zealand private sector firms already
win 70% of the contracts or nearly 70% of contracts.
So they win the lion's share of the contracts
for private sector aid going through the Pacific.
They do so 'cause they have a pretty significant
home court advantage.
They are getting a good chunk of our aid
to the region without us having to stipulate
that this aid needs to flow
through them in an uncompetitive manner.
And then the next reason, um, why giving aid
or tying aid to the Pacific would be a bad idea, uh, is sort
of, uh, set up in response
to one reason why it might be a good idea.
So one reason why tying our aid
to the Pacific might be a good idea is one might contend
that tying our aid to the region would be a good way
of helping New Zealand businesses
and doing so in a manner
that promoted broad-based economic growth in New Zealand.
Unfortunately, that rationale was mistaken too.
So if we were to slip forward a little bit, Zach to the uh,
bar chart, uh,
although you could probably all see it in front
of you on your slides, if you want to grow our economy, uh,
by engaging in industrial policy policies
that help our own domestic industries, what you really want
to do is system and exporting to large global markets.
And this chart is a bar chart.
The height of each bar on the chart reflects the GDP
of the country in question.
Each bar is a country.
The countries over that side of the chart are countries
with very large economies, uh, China, United States,
European countries, uh, Australia.
And those are the countries where you want to exporters
to be focusing their attention.
If we are successful in those economies,
we will succeed in growing our own economy.
At the other end of the chart, you'll see a bunch
of countries with very small economies.
They just aren't significant markets.
Even if we are successful exporters to those countries,
we're gonna do next to nothing to help our own economy.
Uh, what side of the chart are the Pacific countries on?
Well, they're all over there.
Their countries are labeled
and as you can see, they're on the wrong side of the chart.
So if we were to mandate that a certain share of our aid
to the Pacific had to be flowed through New Zealand,
New Zealand private sector countries,
our companies would be doing next to nothing
to help grow our economy, all we would be doing
is subsidizing a small subset
of our private sector companies.
All we'd be doing is subsidizing vested interests in
New Zealand and that's not
how it's meant to work here in New Zealand.
We have a market economy.
And uh, next slide Zach, because this is an important one.
It's where I'm going to slip into my alternate, uh, persona,
which is disgruntled taxpayer from Kilburn, right?
In this current economic downturn, I have friends
who run small businesses and who are tradespeople
and they're suffering right now.
They're not finding it easy
and no one's talking about subsidizing them.
No one's talking about propping up their businesses.
They are set to sink or swim by the state of our economy.
If we were to tie our aid to the Pacific,
we would be propping up
or would be assisting the performance of small number
of companies and doing so in a way that we don't do.
So for most private sector organizations in New Zealand,
what's more would be assisting a small number of companies,
often large engineering firms
that will survive the current recession just fine.
That isn't necessarily going to be the case for my friends
who run small businesses.
So why should I as a New Zealand taxpayer be subsidizing a
small group of uh,
organizations whilst at the same time seeing my own friends
businesses suffer in their own economic fortunes,
suffer as a result.
Then the final reason why tying aid
to the Pacific would be a bad idea runs as follows.
So along with most of my fellow New Zealand taxpayers,
I support first and foremost focusing our aid on it,
helping people, poorer people in poorer countries.
However, you will find people in New Zealand's foreign
policy establishment, people infa for example.
We think we should devote our aid on some other, um,
for some on advancing another reason.
And that reason is they would like
to use our aid geo strategically, um,
to advance our geostrategic interest
and in particular in the Pacific to help chase
China out of the region.
Now, I don't agree with my friends at MFA about this
and if you want we could bring me
and emfa together one day to have a debate about it.
The main point I want to make today though is
that if you tie New Zealand aid to New Zealand firms,
you will undermine your ability
to advance our geostrategic interests in the region.
And the reason why you'll do this
because it becomes pretty obvious to Pacific politicians
and also people in Pacific countries when you're using your
aid to try and advance your own economic interests.
And a really good example
of a country which has done this terribly
is in fact China itself.
So when China has given aid to many Pacific countries,
it has tied that aid to uh, its own state owned enterprises.
And it is an often involved itself in large infrastructure
projects and in the Western
Pacific countries that I know best.
What that has led to has been uh,
Chinese state owned enterprises going into those countries
building large infrastructure projects.
And when they've done this, the labor working on those
projects has been uh, Chinese nationals.
And this has caused real resentment
amongst people living in the settlements
of Hara or Port Mosby.
'cause a lot of those people are unemployed.
They look at these large infrastructure projects
and they say, well, why aren't we working on those projects?
Why are Chinese nationals working on those projects?
And that has really undermined China's ability
to cultivate soft power in the Pacific.
It's really undermined its ability
to make it look good in the region.
And if we were to try and emulate that in some sort of way,
we'd find that we also undermined our own soft power.
So regardless if you're someone like me
who just wants our aid to help people living in Pacific
countries, or if you're someone, someone like some
of the people in MFA who wants to use aid
to advance our geo strategic interests, you're gonna find
that tying that aid to our firms will
undermine our objectives.
That's all I've got to say for now. Excellent.
Um, please, uh, feel free
to ask me any questions you might have. That's
Very useful. Thanks Terrance.
Appreciate that. Um, Tim Costley.
Yeah, I'll just, can I just devil's advocate.
So, so, but just to test it out
'cause I guess that you touched on it at the end.
The contrary argument is, well look, China's doing it.
We send money over China gets all the credit.
Some would say, what's the point
of us doing it if we are not getting the recognition for it?
I know there's a whole altruistic thing for it, but,
but I, I guess that, and
and the second point so
that you can ask them all together would be thinking
of your friends running small businesses, the fact
that we can't help them, does
that mean we shouldn't help the ones
that are in the Pacific with our money?
Like are we better to help at least some Kiwi businesses
than some Chinese businesses?
Wouldn't, wouldn't your mates rather
that someone's getting a bit of help
out of this in New Zealand?
Right. So first part of your question,
I should have brought you some of my uh,
photos from my travels around rural Solomon Islands
in all manner of villages
and remote parts of Solomon Islands.
You'll see small logos saying things such
as this school was paid for by New Zealand aid.
It won't have been built by New Zealand contractors.
It will have been built by people within the
villages where it is situated.
But when we pay for things in the Pacific,
we plant our flag here.
We make it perfectly clear that we've been the country
that's brought those benefits.
So it's not as if China is the only Yeah, we
Do. 'cause that's not necessarily
what we've heard from others.
We are hearing that stuff is going out with, you know,
with very clear Chinese labeling on, on a bunch of stuff
and a lot of New Zealand stuff. Isn't that clear?
Uh, no. We make it as clear as we can.
There are some, some instances where we give aid
through sort of modalities such as giving aid
through multilateral organizations.
Yeah. Where it may not be as visible. Sure.
But to PAC's credit, and I'm not a particular fan of pac,
when they get a chance, they'll whack out
flag on things that we are doing.
Or if they're giving aid to for governments,
they'll make sure that people in important positions in
those governments know exactly where
that aid is coming from.
Second question. Uh, well my friends are taxpayers too
and so I don't think they'd be very happy to know
that you are or we are propping up, down,
up from their businesses are going down the deal.
But, and I think the number of businesses
who would benefit, but
That, that's a bit over the top.
We're not propping up downer.
We're we're, aren't we better
to channel it into a New Zealand company than a Chinese
company is my question.
So yeah, you're right. We're not propping up downer.
So downer won't go out
of business in this recession unlike some
of my friends' businesses.
Yep. Um, and in terms of assisting Downer, we'll recall
that New Zealand businesses already win a large share
of the contracts that are routed through, uh,
New Zealand aid, which go to private sector organizations.
So it's not like they're locked out,
they've got a home ground advantage
and they're already doing quite well
out of the New Zealand aid program. Yeah, let's, good.
Is good. Can I just test that?
So the information we have from says that only 16%,
one 6% of the value of contracts are awarded
to New Zealand businesses.
It's actually a higher number than the one that I gave.
I think they bundle New Zealand businesses in
with universities and, and something else.
Right. Um, so, uh,
Yes, sorry. So yeah,
so that includes private sector institutions
Yeah. NGOs
Yes. Institutions.
So total of 16%. So that seems quite small. Not
Uh, so in fact about 10% of our eight goes
through the private sector.
Uh, and about, uh, so, so 70% of that goes
through New Zealand private sector companies.
Um, so about 7% of our age
of the Pacific goes through the private sector. 7%.
Yes. Like it. And now when you're thinking about
the sector who you should flow your aid through,
then you really do need to think about horses for horses.
So a smaller share of our aid actually goes through our NGOs
that goes through our private sector about
say 10% or something.
Um, so it is not like we're subsidizing our NGOs
particularly heavily, um, with our aid.
Uh, a non-trivial chunk of our aid goes through, uh,
multilateral organizations
and that's in part been a good global citizen.
Uh, and also it's in part
with sometimes multilateral organizations like the World
Bank or the A DB are the best organizations
to be delivering the things that we might want
to achieve with our aid.
Quite a lot of our aid goes through something,
and I think this was in the impact submission to you,
something called government.
Uh, and I gotta admit, uh, a couple of evenings ago,
this was where I started to get frustrating with the way
that donor countries report to the OECD,
but government is a large amorphous entity, uh,
and unfortunately in fact can't untie that money for you
for the same reasons that I couldn't,
uh, a couple of nights ago.
Um, it's based on the way
that people gathered their own data
and report it to the OECD.
Uh, when we talk about aid going through government, uh,
either we mean aid that we give directly
to governments in developing countries,
but often we mean aid that will go
through New Zealand government departments
and quite often working with
New Zealand government departments.
It's a good way of tapping into our own expertise
and using the expertise that we have here in New Zealand
to assist in the Pacific. So yeah.
Can you give us some insight on why Australia
ties 5% of their
Rate? Uh, so less
than our rate. Uh, less than we tie.
That's a good question. Uh, I mean, when I prepared
for this presentation, I looked at data,
uh, focused on New Zealand.
I didn't look at Australia. Okay. Um, so
That's right. If you,
Someone sent me an email and I'll spend some time scale
Though, it helps them just the sheer scale they've already
been, you know, it's very clear how much they give
regardless of how they tie it though, right? Y
Yes. Although by
the same token,
they domestic economy is much larger than our too.
So if you're looking Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Um, and that is why they're the
most important donor in the Pacific.
Not 'cause they're more generous than us. Uh,
Yeah. Uh, just an
observation and you talk about,
and the picture there I think is a really good example of
that kind of overt and covert
or subtle, not so subtle way
that we can advertise our footprint
and our aid to supply to the, to the Pacific.
And after the Tonga volcanic eruption,
I was the defense minister that went there,
I went into this, into the hangar or the shed.
Every Australian box has a big wallaby on the side.
Mm. And ours has a little firm on the top
of the box which nobody sees.
Yeah. You know, and,
and it is as simple as that where you walk in
and go, geez, did we give anything
Here?
And, and, and, and you know, you look at this on the,
on the picture that you've given,
I think we can do things better
to help our people better understand exactly
what it is we are giving.
And the people over there, as we know,
tell au back here in New Zealand whether
or not New Zealand was there to help.
Yeah. Yeah. And a except your graph around, you know,
70% one will just see the focus on poverty.
But we could still address that if
that kiwi stamped on the side of the box in
that example instead of a fern on the top.
Same with, you know, you go to ra,
beautiful piece of road coming in.
No idea that the Kiwi's built that. Yeah.
So sunny areas maybe we are labeling it well
and branding it well, but there's plenty
where we are not either.
And in which case have a chat to impact. Yeah.
To Absolutely public relations people.
'cause even someone like me who would like our age focus
first and foremost on helping promote
development and developing countries.
Yeah. I don't care about flags. Mm-hmm.
There might be a case for using small flags.
Uh, has this been recorded? Um, I guess it is.
Uh, hopefully my employers aren't, uh, listening right now.
Sometimes Australia is seen as being a little brash
and overbearing in the Pacific.
So sometimes the degree of subtlety is probably actually
better when it comes to advance.
Can we maybe delete what I said? Move that from the record.
Excellent. Alright. Look, we'll wrap it up there.
No, you discussion? Yeah. Yeah.
Really appreciate your time this morning, Dr. Wood.
Really helpful. Yeah. Very interesting insights.
Appreciate that, uh, effort you've put into the spreadsheet
and the information you've provided there.
Um, I'm sure, yeah, if you are open to it,
there may be further questions via email if, if that's okay.
Yeah. Please feel free to send me some questions.
I can dig out more data, um, to,
to the extent that it's available to me.
Also, given that I work so much on the Pacific
and also on foreign aid, if you ever have an interest in
getting me in to talk about development issues in the
Pacific or about aid more broadly, uh, just get in touch.
Wonderful.